---
layout: post
title:  Consciousness and Awareness
date:   2020-10-08
categories: academia
---


I recently came across a short and <a href="https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/consciousness-goes-deeper-than-you-think/">not so recent article</a> by the provocative philsopher Bernardo Kastrup. In the short piece, he rebukes the idea that a baby goes all the way from some consciousness-lacking zombie to a fully <i>aware</i> being in its first few months of life. Instead, he suggests that the 'awareness' we develop throughout childhood is only part of what he refers to as 'consciousness proper', something that babies are born with from the get go. 

In short, Kastrup suggests that consciousness proper outstrips what we might colloquially call awareness (the ability to report how we are feeling to ourselves and others, to know the content of our mental world, etc.), and relates instead to the more fundamental 'qualities of experience'. The article continues, suggesting that consciousness is nothing more than these basic qualities, and claiming otherwise is simply conflating the word consciousness with higher cognitive capacities such as attention. In sum, the article proposes that it is the re-representing nature of attention ('meta-consciousness') that grants mental states the ability to be reported to self and other, but there lives a consciousness beyond this that contains mental states both unknowable and unreportable.

I have a few thoughts about Kastrup's article. Firstly, the way he frames mainstream consciousness science as treating attention and consciousness as the same is not exactly true. Whilst they are seen to be related by many researchers, there is in fact mounting evidence that <a href="https://psyarxiv.com/cs8f4">attention and consciousness can be dissociated</a>, and even <a href="https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00500/full">  theories of consciousness </a> that revolve around attention make a point of accounting for the moments where attention and consciousness diverge. Kastrup's move to paint consciousness science as treating consciousness and attention as one and the same is a straw man and deflects from the idea that, just because consciousness can't be explained by identifying it with attention, it doesn't mean that it can be explained without any reference to re-representation of some kind.

By now, you're probably wondering what could non-reportable, unknowable conscious experiences look like (me too). Kastrup seems to suggest that dreaming is a prime example of this. At first, maybe this makes sense: when you're dreaming you have no deliberative agency, self-awareness, etc. Indeed, an extra layer of re-representation is probably necessary for phenomena such as lucid dreaming, when you are fully conscious that you are dreaming and can choose how to act within your dream world. The issue here is that there is currently no formal understanding of how phenomenological consciousness is instantiated, and as such, we can't possibly say that non-lucid dreaming is absent of re-representation <i>just because it isn't re-represented to higher cognitive faculties </i> (agency, autobiographical memory, so on...). Indeed, it could be that phenomenal consciousness relies on re-represenations in alternative, lower-level systems. This idea is linked to a <a href="https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32961150/">recent paper by Joseph LeDoux and Hakwan Lau</a> that argues that re-representations in basic procedural memory could underwrite the conscious experience of ownership of our own mental states. If this were the case, non-lucid dreaming would still be a conscious experience by way of re-representation, even though it lacked features of normal waking consciousness, or awareness. 

Finally, Kastrup states that the gap between reportability and contents of conscious has motivated the rise of no report paradigms in neuroscience. This is, at best, simply incorrect. At worst, it is a sly trick to surreptiously persuade readers that a popular scientific method supports his ideas. The idea of no-report paradigms is to remove the confound of report from neuroscientific experiments on consciousness, specifically in imaging studies. For instance, if you want to see the neural substrates of conscious <i>experience</i>, but whenever the subject in the scanner is having an experience they are also<i> reporting</i> their experience, it is impossible to tease apart the neural bases of consciousness from the neural bases of reporting. No-report paradigms aim to avoid this issue by removing the requirement of participants to report their experiences. The need for such experiments does not imply that there exists non-reportable conscious experience, as Kastrup suggests. In fact, it seems that <a href="https://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/dennett/papers/cohen.pdf">literally no scientific experiment </a>could definitively show such states were possible. Whilst this previous sentence is not evidence in itself againt non-reportable conscious experiences, it does highlight how Kastrup's assertion that no-report paradigms are built to explore the gap between reportability and contents of consciousness is misleading.

So, what are these 'qualities of experience' that outstrip our reporting ability? What is an experience that cannot be experienced? These are good questions, and questions that only idealists (like Kastrup) and pansychists seem to have an answer to. My hunch is that there is no such thing as an unreportable experience, that that is in fact a contradiction in terms, and that 'consciousness proper' is simply that which we experience every day.
<br><br>
<iframe style="display: block; margin: auto;" width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/l8Nc0GI-ni0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

